Document restricted privileges safeguard (#661)
elastisys/compliantkubernetes: docs/user-guide/safeguards/enforce-podsecuritypolicies.md

# Reduce blast radius: Enforcing restricted privileges

Kubernetes by default allows any Pod to run with any privileges it requests, which easily allows an application to take full control over a cluster and everything in it.

> To minimise this risk Compliant Kubernetes employs two systems to restrict which privileges and application can request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimise this risk Compliant Kubernetes employs two systems to restrict what privileges an application can request:
```

> - [Kubernetes Pod Security Admission](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/) (PSA)  - Coarse-grained enforcement built into Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Kubernetes Pod Security Admission](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-admission/) (PSA) - Coarse-grained enforcement built into Kubernetes
```

> - [Gatekeeper Pod Security Policies](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper-library/tree/master/library/pod-security-policy/) (PSP) - Fine-grained enforcement built with Open Policy Agent

Reviewer: More of a rhetorical question, perhaps best answered by Lars or CK, but do we advertise "gatekeeper" or "OPA". I'm just asking so that we are consistent :)

Author: The overview page suggests both which is perhaps not ideal :sweat_smile:

Author: I would vote on Gatekeeper as that is what we run, and it in turn implements OPA.

Reviewer: @cristiklein @llarsson thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Short: Gatekeeper is what we ought to use.

Longer: Never been a fan of how "Gatekeeper" is such a generic word. In that sense, branding-wise, Open Policy Agent is much better. However, they really do scrub their own websites free from "OPA" as much as they reasonably can for the Gatekeeper project. We ought to follow their lead.

Reviewer 3: Let us use `Gatekeeper/OpenPolicyAgent`. Although this is technically somewhat inaccurate, people don't seem to recognize `Gatekeeper`. I can already imagine a future conversation:

> So you use Gatekeeper. Have you looked into OpenPolicyAgent?

Reviewer 3: @aarnq I like your suggestion.

> In addition to enforcement Compliant Kubernetes also employ Gatekeeper mutations to modify security contexts of applications to make it easier to comply with the enforced rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to enforcement, Compliant Kubernetes also employ Gatekeeper mutations to modify security contexts of applications to make it easier to comply with the enforced rules.
```

This modification happens at the stage when Pods are created, which means that their security context may contain additional content compared to the resource they were created for.
Only fields that are unset can be modified in this way.

!!! note
    This model is used to emulate the behaviour of [Kubernetes own Pod Security Policies which have been deprecated and removed in favour of Pod Security Admission](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/04/06/podsecuritypolicy-deprecation-past-present-and-future/).

    One limitation with the Gatekeeper constraints and mutations is that they target resource only based on labels, in contrast to the old Pod Security Policies which gave access to additional permissions through Kubernetes RBAC.

> ## Restricted Pod Security Standard

Reviewer 4: should we maybe add an example with how a pod manifests looks like with all this "recommendations"?

Reviewer: Yeah, I guess it might make sense to have an example of a translation between pod/container-securityContext and the security-policy

Author: Now there's examples both for mutation results and pod spec to psp translation.

The default enforcement in Compliant Kubernetes follows the upstream [Restricted Pod Security Standard as defined by Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#restricted).
This standard includes the following:

- Escalation and privileged mode disallowed
- Host namespaces, host networks, host ports, and host paths are disallowed
- Running as non root user (with a non-zero UID)
- Running with the seccomp profile `Localhost` or `RuntimeDefault` (set by default)
- Running with the `NET_BIND_SERVICE` capability added and `ALL` capabilities dropped (set by default)
- Running with the following volume types:
    - configMap
    - csi
    - downwardAPI
    - emptyDir
    - ephemeral
    - persistentVolumeClaim
    - projected
    - secret

!!! warning
    This standard only enforces that `runAsNonRoot` is set to `true`, one must still either configure a numerical user in the container image or with `runAsUser` that is non-zero for the Pod to be allowed as described in [Enforce No Root](enforce-no-root.md).

!!! note

>     This standard does not enforce `fsGroup`, `runAsGroup` and `supplementalGroups` to be non-zero, however these will be set to one by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This standard does not enforce `fsGroup`, `runAsGroup` and `supplementalGroups` to be non-zero, however these will be set to 1 by default.
```

To do so application developers should put together a Pod Security Policy to be evaluated and accepted by the platform administrator, which then can allow access to these privileges in a certain namespace for resources with a certain label.
The format should be as follows:
```yaml
podSelectorLabels: # Must be provided
  <key>: <value>
  ...
allow:
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: <boolean> # Default false
  privileged: <boolean> # Default false
  allowedCapabilites: # Default empty
    - <linux capability>
    - ...
  allowedUnsafeSysctls: # Default empty (1)
    - <unsafe sysctl>
    - ...
  hostNetworkPorts: <boolean> # Default false (2)
  hostNamespace: <boolean> # Default false
  allowedHostPaths: # Default empty
    - pathPrefix: <hostpath>
      readOnly: <boolean>
    - ...
  runAsUser: MustRunAsNonRoot | RunAsAny  # Default MustRunAsNonRoot
  runAsGroup:
    rule: MustRunAs | RunAsAny # Default RunAsAny
    ranges:
      - max: <GID>

>         min: <GID>

Reviewer: Refresh my memory, if `rule: RunAsAny` does `ranges` need to be supplied?

Author: No, I've added a clarification.

> # Reduce blast radius: Enforcing restricted privileges

Reviewer 3: Shall we add an "Elastisys admonition" at the start?

```suggestion
!!! elastisys "For Elastisys Managed Services Customers"
    These restrictions are put in place to protect **your** data. They are meant to help you comply with GDPR. For more details, please read our Terms of Service, specifically:
    - [ToS A1.3 Security Measures](https://elastisys.com/legal/terms-of-service/#a13-security-measures)
    - [ToS A2.3 Safeguards](https://elastisys.com/legal/terms-of-service/#a23-safeguards).
    
    If any of these restrictions causes friction when deploying your application, please file a [service ticket](https://elastisys.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portals) and we'll happily advise you on how to reduce privileges required by your application.

# Reduce blast radius: Enforcing restricted privileges
```

Please check if the code above renders correctly with `mkdocs serve`. GitHub doesn't have an adequate syntax checker. :smile:

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we start with something like:

This page helps you understand and fix errors of the type: [code block with the error that the application developer will see]. If the error requires something like `kubectl describe ...`, please add that into the code block.

Author: I've added two examples of this, please take a look.

This modification happens at the stage when Pods are created, which means that their security context may contain additional content compared to the resource they were created for.
Only fields that are unset can be modified in this way.

!!! warning
    This means that Kubernetes may warn on workloads that may be permitted based on the results of the mutations.
    Example of this will follow below.

!!! note
    This model is used to emulate the behaviour of [Kubernetes own Pod Security Policies which have been deprecated and removed in favour of Pod Security Admission](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/04/06/podsecuritypolicy-deprecation-past-present-and-future/).

    One limitation with the Gatekeeper constraints and mutations is that they target resource only based on labels, in contrast to the old Pod Security Policies which gave access to additional permissions through Kubernetes RBAC.

## Restricted Pod Security Standard

The default enforcement in Compliant Kubernetes follows the upstream [Restricted Pod Security Standard as defined by Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#restricted).
This standard includes the following:

> - Escalation and privileged mode are disallowed

Reviewer 3: For each of these statement, I'd expect to read how it affects me as an application developer.

```suggestion
- Escalation and privileged mode are disallowed. Usually applications don't need these, unless they deal with hardware devices or need to manipulate the networking stack.
```

- Host namespaces, host networks, host ports, and host paths are disallowed
- Running as non root user (with a non-zero UID)

> - Running with the seccomp profile `Localhost` or `RuntimeDefault` (set by default)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Running with the seccomp profile `Localhost` or `RuntimeDefault` (set by default). This means that your application can only use a limited set of syscalls listed [here](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/main/contrib/seccomp/seccomp_default.go#L55). This is generally not an issue for any application.
```

# Reduce blast radius: Enforcing restricted privileges

This page helps you understand why warnings are emitted when deploying workloads similar to:

```console
Warning: would violate PodSecurity "restricted:latest":

>     allowPrivilegeEscalation != false (container "<comtainer-name>" must set securityContext.allowPrivilegeEscalation=false),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    allowPrivilegeEscalation != false (container "<container-name>" must set securityContext.allowPrivilegeEscalation=false),
```
